When printing strings and numbers, it
would often be convenient to display
So let's swing over to the code and create a new file.
I'm going to call this one repfields.
Alright, so I'm going to start by typing age equals 24, then on line 2 we're going to do print parentheses
double quotes, my age is, space double
quote + str age in parentheses +
double quotes space years, closing double
quote and right parenthesis.
So if we run the program, we confirm we get the output, my age is 24 years, and no longer
getting an error now, when we're using
the plus operator to concatenate numbers
and strings. So using the string function
helps us to, basically, coerce an integer
into a string, but this can rapidly
become tedious; having to coerce every
variable using the string function.
Python 3 provides a much better
mechanism, and that has improved further in Python 3.6. So python 3 allows strings
to be formatted using replacement fields
and the dot format method. And these are
probably best explained with a few
examples. So let's change line 2,
instead of using the string function, I'm
going to put my age is, and I'm going
to put left and right curly braces
before the closing double quote,
with a zero in between them.
So my age is, space left and right curly braces,
zero between that and a space years. I'm going to
delete all the code up until the right
parenthesis, and replace outside the
double quote with dot format age in parentheses.
So this will produce the
same output as the previous example,
but without having to coerce the number into a string. So let's just run this
to confirm that it works. We get the same
output; my age is 24 years.
So the replacement field is represented by the
left curly brace the 0 and the right
curly brace, which is then replaced by
the first value in the format list,
age in this case. And at the moment we've only got the one value in there and
that's the variable age. So that doesn't
look like much of an improvement over
the previous code, but consider this one
instead; so I'm going to type it out.
Line 4, I'm going to type print parentheses
and double quotes, there are, and we'll add
some replacement fields. So first one
I'm going to do is a zero and get all of
these in curly braces, There are zero
days in, then a curly brace again, 1
with curly braces comma, and we'll do the same for 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7.
2, 3. 4, 5, and you can
see I'm putting commas and putting curly
braces around these numbers again, 6
and we'll finish off the last one.
We'll put and, replacement field 7.
So I'm going to do that, then press enter there.
On the next line, type dot format, then another set of parentheses,
and I'm going to type 31 comma in the
left parenthesis, well after the left parenthesis
Jan, March, or M a r, the abbreviations I'm  going to use here,
May, oops, I missed a double quote there.
July, August, October, and the last one, December.
Then a closing parentheses. So I've split that
code over two lines, which is something
you'll see done a lot in Python. Long
lines are actually frowned upon in the
Python style guide, which we'll talk more
about later. For now, just know that
Python allows you to split your lines of
code like I've just done.
Alright, so the replacement fields are replaced by the
values that appear in the dot format
method call, with the first value
replacing 0, the second replacing 1 and
so on. So you can see there, we've actually got a total of 7 replacement fields
defined on line 4, and each of those
values are going to go into the
respective number, 0 through 7. So we've
got a total of 8 items in the list after
the dot format, and each of those will go
into the replacement fields numbered 0
through 7 in our string. So if we run the program now,
and comparing the output at
the bottom of the screen with the values
that appear inside the parentheses
after the dot format method call.
Of course, you probably wouldn't use string literals
inside format, because of course they can
just be included in the string.
So we could have, in this case, replaced what we did there, with something that's probably a
lot more readable; print There are, replacement field 0 days in, in Jan,
March, May, July, August, October and December and
dot format.
So that does exactly the same thing, but I just wanted to demonstrate that you can have multiple replacement fields
inside a string, and we'll just run that
to confirm, and I probably should have
written it like that, and to be consistent,
run it again and we've got the identical output.
The other thing to keep in mind is that
fields can be used more than once,
and they don't have to appear in the order
that the values are provided to the dot
format method call.
It's the field index, the number inside
the curly braces, that determines which
value to be used.
So here's an example to demonstrate that.
So I'm gonna come down here on line 8, print parentheses,
I'm gonna start with a double quote Jan:
I'm gonna start with replacement field 2,
then Feb: 0 replacement field, Mar:
I'm gonna use 2 again, Apr: with
replacement field 1, May: 2, Jun: 1,
replacement field 1, Jul: replacement field 2, Sep: 1 and Oct: 2,
replacement field 2, two more, Nov:
replacement field 1 comma Dec: replacement field 2.
and obviously, I've got a large
font here so we're not gonna be able to
see the entire contents on that line, on
this one line. So what I'm going to do is
actually go to the end there, press enter
there, dot format, and I'm going to put
three values; 28, 30 and 31.
So if we run the program, and you can see now that
wherever there's a replacement field 0,
it's replaced with the first value in
the list, 28. We've only got replacement
field 0 once for February,
and all the replacement field 1 fields are
replaced with the second value, which is 30,
and the third value, 31, is used to replace all the replacement field 2 replacement fields.
Now you can also use
triple quotes. What I'll do is I'll print
a blank line first, and close this run
window down. We'll just print an empty line,
and we can also do something similar
using triple quotes. So I could do print
parentheses three quotes, triple quotes
in other words,
press ENTER there. Then what I'm going to
do is take a copy of this entire line,
just save me typing it again. Okay, take a
copy of that. I'm going to go back and
paste it after the triple quotes. Then
what I'm going to do is just press ENTER
after each one to make it a bit more
readable, and because I'm pressing enter
on a separate line now, I'm also going
to remove the double quotes,
remove the comma rather. So we've got February, March.
That's the end of the line now, so I'm going to add the three closing double quotes there,
and I'm just going to put our
format statement after that, dot format
parenthesis 28, 30, 31, like so.
So now if we run that,
I'm looking at the output for this program. Each month is appearing on a new line and the
number of days is also showing on there as well.
So that, I'm sure we agree, would be very
difficult, or would be very messy, to
reproduce with string concatenation.
So the actual replacement is pretty easy to
work out.
So replacement field zero is
replaced with 28, and you can see the example there,
showing us on line 14. So it's automatically coerced to be a string for us.
Replacement field 1 is replaced by 30.
We've defined that as the second entry
in our format list there, and replacement
field 2 is replaced by 31.
You can see, obviously, the same use of the
replacement fields in the code
and we can see the output showing down the
bottom of the screen. Now if we'd used
replacement field 3 in the string, then
we'd have to produce, or provide rather,
another value in the dot format method
call. Alright so make sure you understand
how the replacement fields are being
used before moving on to the next video.